ladies and gentlemen please welcome
demanding wait okay now as I was saying
please welcome the manager of Mac os10
file systems engineering Clark Warner
thank you the stage police are watching
me and I've heard from my spies that
when I turn around to jump on the stage
something Bad's going to happen to me I
have to be careful I've noticed that the
stage is higher this year than last so I
think I'm ready thank you welcome so we
have we hope some really good
information for you folks whether you're
just a user of Mac OS 10 whether you're
a developer on top of Mac OS 10 or
whether or not you actually want to
implement a file system or some kernel
extension of the file system and we hope
that by the end of the session you'll
have some vague ideas of what you need
to do and whether or not you need to do
some of these things so we've got
information on the interfaces we've got
some information on differences between
mac OS 10 and mac OS 9 that come from
our bsd heritage and we'll also have a
little description of some of the
differences between the different volume
formats that we support mac OS 10 we
have a relatively significant
architectural change to tell you about
in Mac OS 10 involving our buffer cache
and so we're going to spend some time on
that at the end of the session hopefully
enough to give you a feel for what we've
done and why we've done it and for those
folks who have actually been to a file
system session before then you're going
to see a fair amount of review and we
think that's needed for a couple of
reasons one is as Steve said in the
whole keynote on Monday Mac os10 is
becoming very real and they're probably
we expect a lot more folks who have not
actually been introduced to any of the
technology in Mac OS 10 who are going to
need to hear some of the stuff we've
actually talked about in pre
the accession and also given that it's
much more real now I imagine there may
be a few of you who perhaps weren't as
concerned about what you were hearing in
years past and and will want to hear
some of that stuff over again but that
having been said there will be some new
stuff let me start by giving you a brief
overview of the core OS if you went to
the Darwin overview session then you've
seen this picture already and in fact my
tech lead has surprised and supplied me
with this really handy laser pointer so
I can point out the coolest part of the
Darwin systems and it goes like this we
want to tell you a little bit about the
internal architecture of the file system
as well and this this diagram is
something you're going to you're going
to want to keep in your head as we move
along in the presentation so to keep
some several key things I need you to
remember the application environments
classic carbon Coco they all have their
own way of interfacing with the file
system and we're going to talk about
those interfaces a little bit at a later
time in the presentation the actual
stuff that my group works on is here
inside of Darwin inside of the bsd
kernel and we have two interfaces of
particular significance which we'll talk
about in some detail today also as well
as the collection of volume formats that
we support so our basic interface is a
bsd unix interface but vfc traditionally
doesn't support in its volume formats
some of the sophisticated features that
have been available in mac OS in the
past so namely things like resource
forks catalog information and that sort
of stuff and so we've extended the bsd
interfaces to allow for retrieval of
that and establishment of that sort of
information likewise inside of bsd there
is a relatively clean abstract layer
called the virtual file system layer and
that basically separates the file system
dependent from file system independent
layer inside of the bsd kernel and if
you wanted to develop a file system
yourself because you had a new device
type or if you wanted to develop in a
file system plugin which will intercept
all the file system calls and then
deliver information to file systems
beneath this is the interface that you
would actually write to we're not going
to talk in great detail about the volume
formats but suffice it to say that we
supported numbers of in Mac OS 10 we've
got support for the BSD fast file system
which was our implementation of the UNIX
all system HS s HS s plus the network
file system AFS by virtue of the Apple
share server team they've done an eighth
of a sorry NFS client implementation and
and more to come so here's how we're
going to do it here's our session
outline we've we're going to do a local
status update to let you know what's
changed in Mac OS 10 we're going to talk
about some of the new features of the
system since last we got together at
last year's World Wide Developers
Conference focusing on some of the stuff
we've done for DP for and for DP three
and we're gonna as i mentioned talk
about some of the interfaces the various
ways of getting at file system
functionality in mac OS 10 and we're
going to talk about some of those
differences i mentioned between
different volume formats and arising out
of the fact that we have a VSD system
and a mac OS 10 system of mac OS system
coexisting and we'll talk we'll do a
review of the virtual file system
interfaces themselves to give you an
idea of what they look like and how you
might make use of them and we're going
to talk in some detail about the changes
in our buffer caching architecture so
that again if you're one of those Darwin
folks that are building a new file
system you'll have an idea of what sort
of things you'll need to do to change to
work with our new unified buffer cache
the next new feature could be yours
we're going to talk a little bit about
Darwin and maybe some ideas about what
things could happen next so here's our
status update back at this time last
year we demonstrated to you for the
first time ever in public a system a
UNIX based system in that case Mac Mac
os10 booted off of an hfs+ volume and
with the first time ever in public and
this year we're happy to report that
this is just a standard humdrum boring
old part of the system now a DP for and
even back in DP three the primary volume
format is hsf+ the server team has added
support for apple filing up the Apple
file share protocol as I've mentioned
and it's actually in deep before if you
look in your demos folder you'll find an
application called test AFP client and
you can use that application to mount an
apple share ip-based volume on your mac
OS 10 system now it's still a little
early it's the little new you may run
into some bugs but it does work i have
used it we also are well underway with
our universal disk format implementation
it's not in the release yet turns out
that UDF is very much a kitchen sink of
file
Systems it has just about every feature
any file system person could ever
imagine and so it's quite a challenge to
build support for into the system but
we're well underway with that we also
have added support for large files it's
not exposed yet for your use because as
a result of the new caching architecture
we're actually relying on the virtual
memory system for i/o in some cases and
the vm interfaces are still 32 bit but
all the file system interfaces now are
64 bits so that will be able to support
very large files in Mac OS 10 and and
the virtual memory system is going to
change to accommodate that also
important important to note is that all
of the interfaces into the core file
system at the bsd level are you TSA to
utf-8 strings the important thing about
utf-8 it is a single bite character
encoding of unicode characters unicode
for those who don't know is an
international standard that allows for
just about every character in any
language that's in popular use today up
to 65,000 character spaces are reserved
in the Unicode set generally two bytes
but a single bite encoding of Unicode
was invented and it's called utf-8 the
key feature of utf-8 is that you can
pass it through normal c string
interfaces it guarantees that there
won't be any null termination where
there isn't supposed to be and the first
hundred and twenty eight bits which
lipari the first 128 characters in utf-8
are just regular ascii characters and so
for people that are just dealing with a
regular ascii system it's going to look
the same to you even though we've
dictated throughout the kernel that all
file names are going to be utf-8 not
until you start seeing ship shifts and
so forth kanji representations that the
byte stream will start to look different
but the beauty is again you can pass it
through carstar interfaces we also have
a number of new features besides what
we've given you on the status update and
we're going to talk about those in more
detail actually have my tech lead talk
about those in more detail as as we move
along perhaps apologize a little bit our
radar screen hasn't changed much if you
don't remember our definition of the
radar screen is things that I think
we're going to have at some point but
i'm not sure and I'm unwilling to tell
you so you know you can ask the question
but that's the answer you'll get but we
do not recognize that a lot of people
are really interested in a directory
change notification feature and quite
frankly we had sort of hope to have it
by now but they
other things that took priority it is
however something we're still
considering another thing we'd like to
do is allow NFS access to hfs+ volumes
it turns out this is actually quite a
bit trickier than it would seem on the
surface an HSS after all each of us plus
after all rather has pretty much all the
features now that aufs or birthday fast
file system has and so it seems like it
would be trivial to do the same things
that ufs does to allow NFS access but
the problem is there are a number of
architectural issues with mac OS 10
overall that makes us rather tricky and
in a nutshell the carbon application
environment when it runs across the
volume that doesn't support some of the
features that are associated with hfs+
like resource forks and catalog
information access by ID and so forth
well it mimics that for you it actually
builds its own environment for creating
its own separate resource fork and its
own separate catalog information does
its own ID to pass me mapping so that as
an application you don't have to care if
you're on a ufs volume or if you're
talking over NFS you can make the same
carbon calls you've always made and
they'll just work well the problem with
that is on HSS plus we have local
support for all of those features and so
if you were to export an hfs+ volume
over NFS locally the clients would use
the native resource work and catalog
information remotely because the NFS
protocol doesn't have support for this
sort of thing carbon is going to see
that it's in FS and start mimicking it
and so the remote clients will have a
different view of the resource fort data
and of the catalog information and the
local clients will do so that's that's
actually quite a problem for us we're
still figuring out how exactly to solve
that in the short term we'll probably
have some configurations where you can
NFS export hsf+ volumes even though
those problems aren't solved and for
people to just want to use it in a
server configuration and don't worry
aren't so concerned about how the local
access works and are able to step around
the issues we also would like to add
some the file system specifically the
joliet extensions to iso at some point
we'd like to have an NFS implementation
and even more importantly an
implementation that will allow us to
read files from dawson windows so the
fat 16 or fat32 from what are the
windows format file system so now we
actually do have a demo and i'm going to
call conrad mint juleps to bring it to
you I'm always a little bit
jealous of the QuickTime guys because
they get to do these big fancy
multimedia demos and they have movies
that's really exciting and and file
systems we never get to do that stuff
and this won't let us do that stuff so
we're going to sort of skirt the edge a
little bit and try to get in at least a
picture for you and with that i'm going
to introduce conrad mitchell who is one
of the file system engineers on my team
[Applause]
so this actually got working about 20
minutes ago and hopefully it's still
working there's them a dvd-ram disk
installed in this system down below and
it's already mounted and it's mounted on
/ data here
I can see you yeah
I can see I have one movie already there
so last year at this time we gave you
the first-ever public demonstration of
booting off of HFS NHS S Plus you can
imagine what might happen next year when
you all pay your money again and come
back to see us at the worldwide
developers conference in 2001 so with
that I'd like to bring up at dirks my
tech lead and he's going to walk you
through some of the cool and awesome new
features that we've added to the file
system in Mac OS 10 thanks Clark thanks
that I'll do without that it's pretty
amazing to think that last year around
this time we just very carefully demoed
the first booting and routing often HS +
file system it's been quite a year I can
take a moment and talk about some of the
new features that we've added prime
amongst them probably once you realize
that you are running on hfs+ file
systems is Mac OS 10 is a multi-user
system and at its core is a bsd base and
every file and every directory in the
system is going to have permissions
assigned to it those permissions are a
bit like what you may have seen on a FB
file servers but they're not quite like
it there's a similar division between
owners of files and directories and sort
of everyone or guest access class of
people and then there's a group that you
can assign to every object and you can
assign separate read write or execute
permissions to each of these groups
underneath although you'll see names in
most of the interfaces these are mapped
to numeric identifiers that are mapped
out of a database and what access you
have to any given file or directory is
determined by the user ID of the running
process that's all fine and well if
you're running on a single big UNIX
system where things get mounted and they
stay mounted all the time but it's a
different story if you're running in a
mac OS type environment where you've got
zip disks that you can around that
you're popping in and out of machines
all the time and so you have a problem
where the numeric IDs that are assigned
on a disk that may be created on your
neighbor system may not mean anything in
the system that you have created or than
a map to entirely
our names so simply plugging in a disk
and using the permissions on there even
though hfs+ has provisions for storing
the user ID and group ID and permissions
information is not sufficient you have
to worry about what to do when their
permissions on does it make no sense we
wanted to make that as transparent as
possible and to that end we decided to
tag every volume with a 64-bit ID that
we make up the first time that volume is
initialized and the system actually
maintains a list of ID's of volumes that
have knows about and it only uses the
privileges on those disks that are whose
ID is in the list if the ID is not in
the list we fall back to a mode where we
ignore all the privileges on the volume
and we make the person who's logged in
on the machine the owner of all the
files and all the directories on that
system and the only thing to be aware of
is that if a disk is used in that mode
and you create new things on there those
will also be tagged with unknown and
when the system when that this comes
back to the originating system where the
permissions are used they'll see unknown
on there and they'll get the same
treatment the person logged in on that
machine will be the full owner of it but
that's kind of a little subtlety to be
aware of but basically what we strove to
do was to approach as much as possible
the regular mac OS experience of being
able to take a disk put it in your
machine and use it in any way you see
fit and we don't want permissions to get
in the way of that something else we did
is an extension of something that is an
API that's already provided 4afe URLs
allowing you to manipulate server
references as URLs and have the system
mount those for you so this again is
currently supported the only for AFP but
the ideas that will extend it over time
and it's it's the perfect implementation
effective is the implementation fully
connect to dialogue in the finder where
you just type in a URL and the system
take that URL figures out what file
system uses that finds a place and the
file system to make that appear creates
that directory mounts it makes the
server connection I makes it available
to you so it's a very nice API we're
working on that it's still evolving if
you think you have a URL scheme
that would make sense to tie into that
we're still discussing whether we want
to make this dynamically pluggable or
small static list come talk to us
afterwards but that's how we envision
providing access to urls over time
through the file system we've added a
number of features to the system to help
support the age of plus AP is long
filenames or prime amongst them on Mac
OS using the Unicode api's you can now
create and manipulate files with 255
unicode characters and we've extended
the BSD api's to do the same thing as
Clark mentioned utf-8 is now the
standard interface for all files and
directories in the file system and so we
allow you to pass a utf-8 encoding of a
string of up to 255 unicode characters
into the kernel that way so everything
is done through utf-8 and the colonel
and last but not least we surprise
supplied the new system calls that allow
us to support the bulk enumeration calls
and we'll get into some more detail
about that in a moment I want to talk
both a little bit in review and a little
bit to bring you up to date on the
interfaces and talk about the
differences between the behavior of
possibly the same code on Mac OS 10 and
Mac OS so when you're writing your
application you basically got your
choice of one of three environments and
they all make sense of sort of different
times they're all layered on top of the
common bsd layer the owners clark
mentioned that's where we really do our
work and inside bsd there's a virtual
file system or VFS layer that all file
system calls get translated to and that
takes care of doing these concerts and
specific implementation of some
particular feature or operation so
carbon is the natural way to port your
application if you have a Mac OS
application it should be a cinch to
carbonize it and the carbon interfaces
are
you know in most ways exactly like the
existing mac OS interfaces if you're
adding a brand new application you may
want to consider writing to the coco AP
is there a completely different object
oriented set of api's they were designed
from the outset to be very affordable to
a number of different environments and
so they don't support some of the
features that you may expect on HSS or
on Mac OS so there were no resource
Forks there's no support for finder info
those sorts of things but you can have a
very uniform API to general file storage
finally of course there's classic if you
do nothing to your application it will
run in classic and obviously all the
calls are supported there too and as I
said all of those are implemented on top
of a bsd layer that we've extended with
an actually surprising suitably small
number of new system calls I guess the
first thing to be aware of when Mac OS 9
came out we introduced a number of new
API to let you operate on files and
directories with Unicode and with FS
refs a new file a new form of file
reference and all those calls are
supported in carbon so I think I think
the message is clear think Unicode think
fsr it'll work great in carbon the full
range of calls is supported cat search
is supported it's not something that's
in traditional BSD but we've added
system calls to support that and so
anything you can do in nine-point-oh
carbon fully supported the new get
Callaghan for bulk call that I refer to
is a great call it's a bit like the AFP
a numerate call which lets you get
directory information on a number of
objects in the directory in one single
call and it has a very flexible method
of specifying what it is you're
interested in about each particular
object so you can say i want to get just
a name and the finder info for instance
for all the objects in the system and it
will return just that to you you'll see
that actually appear in a number of
different calls and some of the new
system calls as well there are methods
using a bitmap
type of specification to let you specify
which attributes are which pieces of
information about files and directories
it is you're interested in and it's
great because the underlying solve
systems don't have to go and possibly
make up information that you're not even
interested in I mean for the longest
time on Mac OS we've carried around this
number of directories in the root field
just because it was there in MF s when
the Mac was first introduced and we had
no way to tell whether somebody who
called get ball info actually needed
that field or not and so this will help
us move away from that so the BSD
extensions get out early and set a
duelist our new ways of getting
information out about individual files
or directories they basically let you
specify a buffer that your information
will be filled in two and a bitmap with
a couple of fields very much like the
AFP gets all their problems call again
you can say i want the finder info about
files i want the forks lengths and
that's it and you'll get exactly that
returned search FS is a very direct
implementation of the cat search
functionality and all the things you can
do with cat search you can you can do in
this system and it's all implemented
through search of s exchange data is an
implementation of the file exchange
functionality will let you do save saves
of data and these are all things that we
needed to do to support carbons
functionality but there were no
equivalent bsd calls to do it most other
things actually map pretty
straightforwardly to existing bsd calls
all the various variants of open and
open DFS and whatnot oldest map to the
straight i'll be at the open colon for
those areas or we didn't have any system
calls to support them we made up these
new 1s control is an existing VSD system
call it lets you do various operations
on open files and we added an option to
let you do file allocation for instance
the allocate call was not something
that's known in the bsd system get der
entries adder is the system call that
was added to do the bulk enumeration and
if you are at all familiar with the
attribute list get out a list and set
out a list API you
is very familiar there is an attribute
listed as fast and a buffer and a size
that you specify and a few parameters
would let you say which entries in the
directory you're into interested in how
many items you are prepared to take back
and various options that you can pass
and with that one call you can get
information on a whole number of
directory entries all at once possibly
the whole hole directly in one single
call so it's a very efficient way to
enumerate file data the VFS layer is
something we'll get into in a little bit
more detail later but as I said that is
the layer inside the kernel that
separates the file system independent
system call layer from the process and
specific implementation of certain calls
and it basically manipulates these
abstract data structures called v nodes
that are specific to each file system
and there's a dispatch table that's
associative H with H V note that lets
the system dispatch to the concert some
specific implementation of some call if
you're writing file systems and you'll
get very familiar with that layer of
interface now there are some differences
in the way that code works even if the
code looks the same or similar uniques
for instance very flavors of unix and
bsd among them lets you delete open
files which was always a big no-no under
mac OS you'd get busy error if you try
to do that we support both semantics if
you're calling the delete call in carbon
you'll call a variant of unlink that
actually will return an error if it's
open but if you are a bsd or a Coco
application calling unlinked to remove a
file from the directory that will
succeed even if it's open so it's
possible that solves you have opened
will get deleted from the catalog that's
not as well of an adjustment as you
might think because even under mac OS 9
it's always possible that something
would get deleted or renamed out from
under you and no longer appear where you
thought it appeared and Don may get in a
moment to the kinds of games we play to
make this happen but it's something to
be mindful of hard links are
a strictly unix ism it's a way for two
entries in the catalog to refer to the
same exact data on disk and this is this
is not an alias that you resolve to get
to the data these are two equivalent
names to get to the same data on the
disk so again that may be something to
be to be mindful of one thing in the
UNIX all system ap is it's very careful
not to return you data that you have not
yourself written and if you're just
streaming out of file that's no issue
you're you're writing everything before
you'll ever read it but you should be
careful of some things that may have
made perfect sense at times on Mac OS
like all I'm steady us to extend the
file to its maximum length before you
start writing the data now to prepare
for the possibility that you might
actually read that data since the
logical and the files been moved out
that whole intervening gap between the
current us and where you're setting is 0
filled so you may be doing gigantic iOS
where before you were doing absolutely
none calls like allocate are fully
supported and there are much better way
of making sure that the data is
available on disk before you make your
right call for instance then set eof is
one sort of quirk in the bsd api is that
there is no notion of a createdate the
way there is no hfs+ hfs+ volumes have
them and we support them but if somebody
uses the bsd api is to manipulate the
modification dates of file the create
dates are actually untouched and until
we decide to do something about this you
may actually see modification dates that
are prior to the creation date of a file
it's a little weird but against
something to be mindful of and then of
course about separators unix PSD all
users / to separate path names and HFS
mac OS uses colon now most mac
applications have long been discouraged
from using full path names but if you
have one that does usually aware that
the pathnames that you use in your
carbon calls are not the same path names
that you should use if you make bsd
called the system underneath actually
translate between colon and / for you
and the results may be surprising if you
call BSD api's to enumerate a directory
you may see files with slashes in them
but they will appear to you with colons
inside the name because we can't pass up
a pathname through the BSD layer that
has a slash in it we can safely pass one
with a colon in it so between carbon and
BSD in the system there's all kinds of
colon and / translation going on and if
you are spanning these two layers if
you're doing some BSD calls and some
carbon calls you should be careful about
that name separators finally we support
a range of different file systems and
they all have their own implementation
and they all have their own quirks
unique systems be is the no exception
the ufs file system has long been case
sensitive we decided not to make and
case sensitive implementation of H of S
or HS + so HFS is the same case
insensitive that case preserving file
system but you may be running into other
file systems unbeknownst to you because
you're you're just reversing the catalog
hierarchy and run into ufs volumes that
are mounted there which are case
sensitive so if your application counts
on being able to find the same name
under two different case representation
that you're going to be surprised and
that's actually very much very common in
code where you refer to a header file
first by one name led by another if you
do then you FS you may run into trouble
like that sparse files or something that
you FS has long supported that there's
been no precedent for on hfs+ although
we've had some requests for it on
occasion basically sparse files are away
for the file system to store your data
files without storing the gaps in the
data blocks that you've written so you
can seek out to a location two gigabytes
into your file and ripe 10 bytes of data
there and on ufs that will actually only
take about ten bites on disk that's not
something that's supported on h plus
plus so if you try that because you're
porting a PSD application or something
you may be surprised to find that step
one is to allocate two gig of data and
then go write your 10 bytes of data
so hard lengths are supported on hfs+
but not on HFS they're supported on ufs
and NFS as well but again if this is
something you count on you better make
sure you know what file system it is
you're talking about and so there are a
number of subtle gotchas even though the
basic application that you have if you
port of the carbon and running on age 50
plus volume will run remarkably well and
changed and you may be unaware for
different altogether at this point I'd
like to bring up Don to talk about some
of the differences between the way hm s+
volumes are used in the system don thank
you ok that's it i'm going to talk about
the some of the cage we made to the HFS
plus volume format in general most
almost all these changes should be
transparent to all of you out there but
some people like the hard code things
and so for that reason you're going to
have to suffer through all these boring
details here the first set of changes
involve what we do during initialization
during in Mac OS 10 for each of us plus
swallowing formats primarily we made
some changes for performance and for
some of the features like hard links
that we added the allocation block size
which used to be variable size or not
had different different sizes now we
settled on 4k because of the vm page
calf size and the b-tree we up the
catalog 28 k and the extents to 4k and
one interesting point is when we did the
original hfs+ format we chose 4k in 1k
so that people wouldn't hard-code a 4k
as the node size but when we went to 8k
we discovered that some people like hard
coded so don't do that the HFS wrapper
we added that for support with her
legacy systems for the booting and for
interchange so that you wouldn't get too
uninitialized volumes when you when you
mounted them going forward we're using a
different strategy for mounting volumes
for booting up volumes
rather and so the rappers are going to
now be optional having said that if you
use if your strategy for reading the
volume name off a partition is to go
into the rapper and look at the MDB
you'll be disappointed because it won't
be there like I said we have the startup
file now where we use that to boot for
Mac OS 10 however I should note that
that startup file is not in the DP for
release that since that will be in the
follow-on release the last mounted
version up until now had been set at 8.1
now that we're using a different code
base we've upped that to 10 point 0 as
Pat mentioned there's some bsd fields
that we now are used the permissions
data and the last access state we now in
force permissions and we initialize them
under mac OS 10 and on every read and
write access we set the last XO state
finder info is mentioned here it's not
really finder it's not really fossil
some data but people tended to use it in
file system calls so i mentioned i
mentioned in it here typically like the
type and creator and the invisible bit
are often used however you should be
aware that in mac OS 10 often they'll be
uninitialized so if you're doing
searches for criteria on type and
creator be aware that they they might
not be initialized one thing one
interesting we discovered when we were
debugging is that there's a occasionally
in time in mac OS 9 you'll get file
names with embedded nulls mainly do
because they had a pascal interface and
you could actually do that it's not a
good thing to do but so we to support
those and not not trip up some of the
stacks and the faucets and layers of we
we allow them to go through but you can
no longer to create them we in the past
week we'd really didn't have any reserve
file names but we a long time ago pre
system 7 we discourage the use of dot
dot prefixes and files mainly because
the file system and the device manager
shared a common open call we needed to
differentiate between opening a file and
a device that support is no longer there
so we no longer discourage and in fact
given our VSD underpinnings we have lots
of files that start with the dot but
that's not a bad thing anymore of course
you should avoid naming any file dot or
dot dot because we use those in the bsd
layer there is some pseudo metadata
additional we in the past we had apple
share and like the desktop DB now we
have symbolic links and the hard link
and the deleted files all this stuff
should in terms of the pseudo metadata
should be completely transparent in
carbon you'll see symlinks as aliases
and in the POSIX and the cocoa layers
they'll actually automatically resolve
so you won't even see them but we just
tell you about that so you know about
them we updated the disk first aid and
the fsck to be able to fix hard links
and we came any of the files that were
we're hidden for the the lean on busy
and if you're doing any type of repair
utility we encourage you to also add
that minimal support into your
application back to you Clark
thank God well if you attended Steve's
overview on Monday you know that there
are a million different ways that quick
tim technology is distributed on CD ROMs
of famous artists sorry up audio CDs of
famous artists he also actually had a
cereal box with a CD in it that had
quicktime technology well I have great
news as part of the whole new era of
respect for file systems that got us
this large hall to get together in my
boss just informed me that we have made
a deal with the makers of generic cereal
for the distribution of flouse and
technology in the lesser stores near you
[Applause]
all right let's talk about the virtual
file system layer so to begin this is
the layer in the file system that you
would implement too if you wanted to
develop a new system there are two
fundamental uses of it a new file system
for a new device type or a new protocol
or what we call a file system stack the
WAV file system stacks work is they
basically implement a set of functions
to the VFS interfaces and they sit on
top of an existing file system and at
the bottom they call that same VFS
interface for a lower file system to
process so for example if you wanted to
build an encryption system you could
build a file system stack you would
support the VFS interfaces most of your
VFS calls would simply call the file
system underneath underneath you but if
you wanted to do I oh then you would
look at the buffer encrypted if it was
coming in decrypted if it was coming out
and so you would call the file system
below you to get the data make your
manipulation and then return to the
caller or you would get the information
from the caller through your
manipulation and then call the file
system below you to finally do the right
so that's that's roughly what the VFS is
for two key data structures you need to
know about if you are really seriously
thinking about implementing a file
system or a file system stack and the
first is the v known which stands for
virtual node and this is the key data
structure that represents a file in our
system
if you programmed in Mac OS it's similar
to a file control block on FCB but there
is one key difference V nodes are
created whenever a file is referenced
for any reason not just when a file is
opened so if you just wanted to get
filesystem statistics if you did the
equivalent of a get cat info we're going
to allocate a V note inside of our
system and we're going to initialize it
and it's going to stay around for a
while we have a cache of these in the
system and up to thousands of them but
just stay in case you want to reference
that file again so we don't have to
recreate it and we also have another key
data structure a mount structure which
is kind of similar to a volume control
block so these are these are the two key
data structures that you'll need to work
with if you're wanting to implement a
file system there are also two key
segments of the VFS interface there are
what we call the FF calls and I
apologize for the name confusion but we
inherited that and there also vinodh
operations or Bob calls the reason
they're called this is because if you
actually look in our code if you look in
the files with an independent layer of
system call processing you'll see some
work go on and then you'll see a call to
something called VFS underbar something
or via underbar something and what those
are our macros that look for the
dispatch table for the write operation
to call given the type of aveeno that
it's about to make the call on or the
type of file system it's about something
to call on if it's a VFS operation
you'll see VFS underbar operation and it
will call the VFS routine for that file
system if it's a file based operation
you'll see a V off underbar operation v
op remove the op open V up close and so
forth and it will make that call to the
underlying routine in that file system
so while you see all these V op macros
scattered about if you look at the
implementation for any given file system
you'll see they have routines called in
the HFS for example HFS closed HFS open
HFS removed those are the routines that
will actually be called when you see V
ops calls inside of the code so let me
give you a walkthrough of some of the
VFS operations actually I think we have
the full list of these one quick note to
instantiate a file system in bsd and
this is the model we've inherited mac OS
10 you first create a directory and then
you mount the device which corresponds
basically to our petition on a hard disk
driver or some protocol that elysia's to
a hard disk over on the server you
actually mount the device
on top of the existing directory if the
directory was not empty all the files it
and directors anything that was in that
directory disappears from view from your
system until you unmount it again so
usually we do this on empty directories
so you'll create a directory you'll
mount the device on top of the directory
and from that point on that directory
will be a window into all of the files
on that partition that you've mounted
there in that place the FS mount is VFS
unknown are the calls you use to
manipulate that so the FS mount is going
to create and fill in the root V know
the V known for the root directory that
you've just mounted on that directory
and it'll initialize the mount structure
the SS sorry VMs unmount is going to
clean up the mount structure and remove
that device from that file system you
create from the directory that you've
created and from that point on you'll no
longer be able to access the files on
that volume run that partition but you
will be able to access any files that
were left in that direction when you
mount it on top of it the SS roots job
is to give you back the root vinodh
given amount structure so if you're
trying to do fascinating processing
you're starting at a mount point this
will get you the root V node status s is
just a get statistics call it's kind of
like a get vol info it is give me some
information about this overall volume
things like the overall size or the
amount of free space available that sort
of thing the FSB get will get into
detail but this is the call we use to
support access by identifier so if you
want to implement a file system that
allows access life directory ID name the
way hfs+ does then you'll need to
support VF sv get the FS in it is just
your basic file system initialization
routine you may or may not need to
support VFS in it it depends on whether
or not you have some global file system
wide data that you need initialized at
mountain or I mean at be when your
system is first initialized the SS fh to
vp the stands for file handle to v node
pointer and vp to F H stands for V node
pointer to file handle and these calls
are specifically for supporting NFS
access to your volume these are the two
key guys for getting file handle sent
across NFS for remote access and sis
control and quote Apple will go to
detail about those but those are for
supporting system level controls of your
file system and for quotas
we're not going to give you an
exhaustive list of all of the vino de
operations but I will tell you about
some of the important ones and these are
the ones you'll actually be tested on
later when we talk about our caching
architecture so bop look up this is the
most important and most complicated of
all the vino de operations and its job
is to handle passing resolution so
basically you give it a pass name that
starts from a directory that belongs to
your filesystem and you give it a string
that contains a bunch of past name
elements separated by a slash and then
this routine will give you back of inos
and it's generally called it early as we
do the lookup process in the system so
you'll get a component pointer you'll
get a V note that corresponds to a
directory to your lookup call you will
turn the V note for the next thing in
the past you'll get called again if
that's one of yours and it will go on
and on and on until look up finally
reaches the end of the path and gives
you back the V note for the end file
that you wished to target probably worth
mentioning that Mac os10 has a singly
rooted hierarchical file system layout
much like bsd the carbon interfaces will
abstract that for you they'll know where
all the various mount points are and you
can ask the carbon interfaces for a
mountain list and work like it did in
Mac OS 9 but in Mac OS 10 there will be
actually a complete hierarchical file
system list and sobieski calls will work
and the cocoa environment which relies
on that will also work and so look up
becomes a very central routine in Mac OS
10 open and close are what you're
expecting their the two routines that
enable you to start doing access to a
file and rip out that ability later read
and write basic read and write routines
truncate which is used to both grow and
shrink a file the name is little
unfortunate but you can truncate a file
and send send its weight its valid space
way out to the end moving cof or you can
also do a truncate and reduce the size
of the file because all the way to 0 if
you like eps inc is file synchronization
this is the call that takes all of the
dirty buffers you may have associated
with your file in that system and starts
I yelled to the disk on those so that we
can get all the data flushed that we
have cashed in memory out to the disk
you can make sure that your file data is
consistent it's a lot like flush files
in Mac OS 9 and bop remove that's
basically the delete call as we
mentioned before in order to give the
full range of abilities of HFS hfs+
things traditionally associated with Mac
OH
we've extended the BSD interfaces to add
things like it out our list and sat or
list that will get you to things like
the catalogue information a lot of you
searching while all of those calls are
also supported by underlying vinodh
operations and so if you wanted to
implement the file system that supported
getattr list you implement bob get a
doorless the way we didn't hfs+ and then
those abilities will be available to
your callers so now we're at the risk of
real hard stuff you want to talk to you
about this big change that we've just
made in our caching architecture and
anybody who's actually thinking of
implementing a file system will need to
know this and will also tell you about
why we did it the changes in the caching
architecture were actually done by the
bsd team with some assistance from the
file systems group but this is something
that spans both file system development
and the virtual memory system and so
we're fortunate i'm going to talk a
little bit about the beginnings of this
and later i'm going to bring up ramesh
one of the bsd engineers will tell you
the details about how that system works
this is a rough picture of what our old
cash looked like and up on the top top
of your right that big box it says VFS
there that's the VFS interfaces we've
been talking to you about and then
that's our underlying support for all of
the different file systems this is I'm
going to walk you through how the
buffering used to work when a read call
would come through basically the overall
bsd call Reid would come in and it would
go to the VFS layer we dispatched the
appropriate file system that was going
to service it and then that file system
would most likely call the buffer cache
underneath the buffer cache might have
that data already read in memory because
you've read it before or because you
were doing sequential access we
anticipated that that page was going to
be read and we put it in memory for you
in advance and it will satisfy the
request out of the buffer cache and if
not then the buffer cache will call back
to one of your routines to actually read
the data off of device or get it off the
network so that's the basic that's the
basic deal come in with a read go to the
file system that supports it talk to the
buffer cache try to satisfy the page
that it generally works pretty well and
the buffer cache can be used to optimize
performance well there's this other way
of doing i/o in our system that we call
file mapping and some of you if you've
worked on bsd may be familiar with this
but the idea is you can open up a file
and then you can decide that a certain
range of address by the way I appreciate
the applause over there
a certain range of address will be back
by that particular files they'll say hey
I'd like you to make addresses 1000
through five thousand valid for me and I
want you to use as their backing store
this particular file that I'm telling
you about and then if you read anything
in that array of addresses you'll get
the data that's actually in that file
that you've decided is mapped into that
array of address so it's a very handy
way of doing I oh but it does cause some
interesting problems for file systems is
the first one being the cash for the
virtual memory system is different from
the cash for the file system released it
was in earlier versions of Mac OS 10 and
so to walk you through this you have a
process he comes along maps a range of
data says he would like it backed by
this particular file and then starts
reading the memory what happens is the
vm cash will start doing I yo via new
calls called page and page out they'll
eventually call the file system
underneath they'll get the data and then
they'll put it into the vm cash and the
vm cash will then satisfy those requests
but what can also happen is one process
can open the files I read and write
another process can map the file and
either of those processes can now write
to it the read and write process was
going to write to it via the normal
filesystem read/write API and the data
is going to be cash in the buffer cache
the mass while is just going to write
into an array of memory and it's going
to believe that that mapped into that
file but in the meantime it's going to
be stored in the vm cash until the vm
system decides to flush it so if two
processes open up the same file by these
different mechanisms they can actually
wind up with inconsistent data that
corresponds to the same address in the
file for that page of memory that's kind
of actually diagrammed here you'll see a
page of memory here in our buffer cache
that's supposed to correspond to a page
of data in the file another page in the
vm cash and you can see how these guys
can become inconsistent that's the big
problem we have these two caches and the
data can become inconsistent in these
two caches because read/write is using
this files for the buffer cache and the
vm system is using a separate cash and
as long as these things were totally
distinct you could get yourself into
trouble now to try to avoid some of
those problems in DP three there were a
number of synchronization points in the
file system where we would check with
the vm system to see if it had data and
try to get flushing to happen and so
forth but there were
still some holes in there and while it
was unlikely you might have stumbled
across some cases where your file system
data looks sort of inconsistent so what
we've done oh let me tell you what we
did a Mac was ten server we recognize
that this was a potential problem so we
had a solution for this issue in Mac OS
10 server what we did was we implemented
something called the map file system and
what it did was turn all regular i/o
into Madaya and so the vm cash became
supreme in a mac OS x server system you
would do a reading you would do a write
and actually ultimately would turn into
a map call and we would map it into a
spot in the Colonel's address space as
opposed to the process of the address
space well that worked pretty well and
it did get rid of the potential data
inconsistencies but the buffer cache was
a fixed size and rather tiny underneath
that was a bit of an issue that the end
system again was reigning supreme and so
some of that read ahead stuff might not
be happening there still were two copies
of data in the system now while the vm
cash was sort of super imposed on the
buffer cache so that you would never get
the data inconsistent you could so
complicated atta because the vm system
would ask the file system the father's
can we get out of the buffer cache and
it would go back up they were never
different data but there were still two
copies and that was inefficient only
part of the file could actually be
mapped in the kernel we don't have the
full range of process address spaces we
had one kernel address space and so that
causes to have to do some funny things
like potentially throw out mappings for
different processes as new processes
would come and go and and wish to do I
oh because we only had a limited address
space that meant that not all currently
map files made could necessarily be
mapped at the same time and you know you
might not be able to map the entire file
at once because we had to deal with this
limited address space so we're throwing
mappings in and out of the colonel all
the time causing potential performance
issues and it also wasn't very friendly
to the file system because reads and
writes would come in and the file system
wouldn't get them right away they would
be redirected to the vm system the vm
system had its cache and going and it
would only call the file system when it
decided to flush it's cash or bring in
new data and so if you wanted to have a
counter in your file system of all the
reads and writes that were taking place
you might you wouldn't have them at the
time they use your ass you'd only see
them when the vm system was ready to
communicate so that was an issue too so
what we've done is we've just unified
these caches bouncing bullet was a lot
of work but it
but it's into DP for and so we got rid
of all of these issues and now there's
just one cash for both the vm system and
the file system and there are all the
pages that are associated with the file
are satisfied out of the same cash so to
talk about some of the details of that
we've brought up ramesh was one of the
bsd engineers and he'll walk you through
some of the implementation of the
unified buffer cache hi good afternoon
my name is Ramesh basically as a suit
for the croc pension that we had two
kinds of caches in the system went to be
in page cache which was a big thing and
we had a tiny buffer cache which is much
smaller bigger use within shoe buffer
cache we had a data inconsistency the
baby is to construct buffer cache was
Rennicks Mackeson machine bruges earlier
and very early Earth it's the second
wheel ordered when transfers of control
to the corner when the corner comes up
initially it has a pool of pages select
with this pool consists of all the
physical pages in the system except for
the pages that are consumed by the
contextual data itself what we used to
do is carve out a small portion of the
pages from there and then these are
meant to the use exclusively for buffer
cache and this is where the fixer side
is fix it sighs the bark is coming
because these take a number of pages
that we are trying to use that for the
buffer cache as transmission before like
we have one huge honking p.m. pays cash
but one side and we had a small buffer
cache cache in to what we did basically
was to stop using the buffer cache for
the file data what we did instead is to
turn all the file io data to the VN page
cache itself now that we turn all the
white pages into the vm paid cash we we
have to implement a mechanism to track
all the pages corresponding a particular
file or a single page corresponding to a
particular file at a particular offset
in the vm page cache for this elapids we
implement a mechanism called Universal
page list what Universal page list does
for us is to go to get at a page a
specific page in the system Universal
page list is a mechanism to get at a
page in a memory object and it actually
also allows us the physical access to
the page so that we can use that to do
dma directly we thought ever mapping
inside the corner address space if you
want to know more about the page lift
the condensation on 106 on the thursday
morning nine o'clock they will discuss a
broad face if you need to know one of
the more about the sales tax audit what
we did was to use these ups universal
page lists and develop an infrastructure
and since I structure underneath the
buffer cache GTR the buffer cache a
facial at be deeds will I get blog
readers and things like that so not all
the colors of the buffer cache appears
never have you changed because we
maintain the CM eps we changed all the
plumbing underneath the other day to use
unified buffer cache we also wrote a set
of proteins that we need to sprinkle all
a lot of different file systems to work
with the unified buffer cache the best
way for me to explain all this is to
take different scenarios in a life cycle
of a file and then see how incredible
for cash works there okay first let me
take up the open let's assume that we
were opening a file in HS volume so that
all the windows are issues that i'm
going to be talking about or basically
hfs+ be no operations and we're also
let's also assume that we're opening the
file for the first time in the system as
part of the open
the first open it as part of the open
system called implementation the colonel
the first thing it tries to do as Craig
mentioned before is to convert the path
leads from patmans to a file the
presentation instead of our system so
basically that for our example is going
to be hazardous look up this interface
look up is a beaner operation look up in
order operation high surface one of the
things that it will do is go and see
whether the file already exists you know
and see whether it needs to clarify you
to press the correct flash was open and
then it body does in weathered the file
exists or not be created or the file was
already there it creates the vinodh it
creates a winner for the that particular
file all switches references to the file
all manipulations to file from now
onward goes through this be known in the
lookup we added our first of support
rotis that was talking about false
conspiratorial if I prefer cash Carly
busy infinite what does you be seen for
leaders basically he's create a memory
object and create an association between
that memory object will be just created
until we know which we just created it's
a one-to-one Association for example if
we're looking at a two thousand offset
inside this we know it translates to a
two thousand offset inside the memory
objects that we created now let me take
another scenario where we just random
map default let's say we take hostage
case of the forest I'll be mapping the
current address space suppose a user
this usually basically comes to the
kernel as an EMS system call what we do
only map system call is basically set up
a pager and then allocate a 32 carriage
because I'm one example study 2k these
are a 30k at this range in the user
process for this particular
file patty and then we return the
address have this where we allocated in
the user space back to the user to the
American car note that we haven't done
any page I will not daily file i wore
nothing yet nothing has happened yet
when the user first access this address
range let's taken as in our example he's
leading the first bite of this allocated
range what happens at that point of time
since there's no page back in these are
just arranged it's going to generate a
page fault the vision system goes and
tries to resolve the page part the page
is not there in the system so when it
allocates a clean page and then try
sticking the data from the file system
for this page in our case since we're
taking an example of HFS plus it
ultimately goes to the winner pleasure
and falls into HFS beijing call which is
responsibilities to get their fault copy
the data from the deal to this
particular page which vm gave us and
then it returns the page back to the vm
and this page stays in the vm page cache
and all future modifications that user
would play with this particular page
would happen without any knowledge in
the file system or anywhere that let's
say for our example we access some more
pages i just put like a sparse and it's
not always contiguous so we wrote each
file k and then twenty to thirty to give
in or files we have touch then now i'm
going to take a snare where we just want
to do a right on at an offset 15 just to
be completely more interesting like i
was 15 and then we just write only 10
bytes data into the we wanted to the
file so we use a right system call to do
that as part of the righteous and call
implementation inside the kernel which
will then translate to their particular
be no operation for that file system
which happens to be head to fight for us
what we use
we then use a universal k-swiss protein
called reinforces request and we ask
that the dream for vista crystal return
of the page to starting in an offset 0
of the size which is equally to the page
size what it does is it gives us the
exclusive access to that page which was
reselling the vm page cache once the
page has been obtained we then copy the
data from the user before which he had
to this page once we copied the data
back into the system then depending on
what file success want to see either can
write up the data immediately to the
dish are we can they can delay postponed
while you could risk it had suppose we
actually delay the right so then all we
do then is babe it's basically written
the page back to the main page cache
that we used to by using a kernel you
peel commit cause which is also coming
from the universe Universal page list so
basically we did a copy of 10 bars into
the system which the which the user who
has mapped this can also see the
modifications that were already done ok
let's I just took another example where
he just 13 another page as well I'm
going to know who to take another
scenario where we will talk about the
winner operation collapsing what a bad
thing in our example it's competitive
things basically the hfsf Nico's
responsibilities to push all the
modified data from the from the buffers
back to the disk since we have modified
data in the vm page cache we have a new
protein which type thing also has to do
a portion whatever it used to do before
called ubc push 30 body bc push 30 does
if cosa looks at all the modified data
corresponding this particular file that
was they will be in page cache and write
it back to the disk that sells all the
data ghosal system
I forgot to mention that the sexing
wiener operation can come into this once
the users program can call guessing
system call to make sure that all the
modified data is in respect to the disc
or it can also come from the system
which periodically runs a system called
card sink which goes to looks at all the
modified data in the system for all five
wishes then two diff so even if you
don't explicitly college thing but they
guys think back to the disc now I'm
going to take an example of the trunk is
we just want to target the file back to
16 k basically what i mean is the
logical end of the file is set to 16 k
so we have our support routine called
ubc set size which basically what it
does is it invalidates all the pages in
the vm page cache which are being the
end of the logical beyond the logical
and lots of hot so as you can see in
this diagram they're all the pages the
remarks 20 k 24 k c8 k they're all gone
they're all invalidated so they don't
exist olivion page cache now i'm gonna
go to the last you know that i want to
talk about where the file gets deleted
so basically everything that we set up
four so far we just stare everything tom
so we do they're done three steps first
we call the UVC set ranch ratings which
i mentioned in first part of the target
which basically takes away all the pages
that were there have been me and paige
cash basically we set it to 0 as the
logical end of the size and then we also
call it another function called ubc
release which basically dissociates the
memory object association with a V
naught and then we also need to call and
the racine call you BCM cash which
basically tells the insistence don't
ever cash this memory objects because vm
does cash all the memory objects are you
have so this basically gives us a robe
holder or review like how we have
implemented the unified buffer cache and
what kind of set of proteins that we did
something like that now I'm going to
curl five next two slides aboard like
what each file system has to do and what
kind of changes each file system had to
go through to work with unified buffer
cache when implementing the unified
buffer cache we introduced five he knew
we knowed operations actually two of
them were already there three of them
anew and in this file for mandatory you
need to have them to what the do bc and
the last one is optional the first part
is a mineral operation called a block to
offset but it basically does is given a
logical block it converts and gives us
back the file acid if you if you know
already that all the buffer casualties
like get blog we need everything was a
logical block numbers use you tell BD
logical number block and then it returns
the data back so since all the memory of
this work with the offset this basically
tells us what the offsets conversion for
that last number is because every file
system can have their own logical block
size and the next one is this exactly
opposite it's actually our translation
the office k logical block number which
we use it in the page of fun to shoot
any professor there in the cash we also
have her 22 next next to on mineral
operations page in and pager they
actually existed before you require
buffer cache to the slight differences
in there like me first mini fight with
page listed are universal pages are
other than that there is nothing changed
there and then the last one is used for
the cluster filesystem clustering it's
called zmapp it's very similar to be mad
but be mapped to speed on operation does
given a logical block number it goes in
concrete action physical disk block
number so that we can do an eye on it
what see map does is it takes a file
upset instead of logical block number
and it also turns and returns the disks
are it also returns but this block
number corresponding so that we can do
an IO when it also tells us how much
contiguous blocks are there from darkest
block on work so that you can do a big
chunk of i/o if anybody wants to use
file system first thing then they need
to implement that too and as I already
mentioned in all my examples like the
old file systems have to sprinkle these
500 people yes five supporter things
that we wrote so for example just to
recap them ubc in point is we need to
insert them whenever we clear the
pillars and then we need to call you
busy push dirty it's basically whenever
you want to send the modified data back
to the vm page cache of this cute
implement that and then we need to call
you bc sex eyes whenever you will find
size changes the file size can change
for example when you are growing if i
buy right system call it changes the
size that's the time when you need to
call them and also when you are
shrinking the files we're using a chunky
as hard you love making a chunk it to
the pollen in any case you need to call
you be steadfast and then when you
actually delete a file what's the file
system actually does to do it honk it
because they need to get rid of all the
disk block the delegator this to things
like that if you already don't do that
then you need to or do a research first
otherwise you need to do you bc release
and UVC on cash we're going to be having
a and we're going to be putting a
document saying how to write file
systems to you bc it'll be there in
darwin sometime in your future that's be
good to show all the code for the
unified buffer cache and all the file
systems are there on the system's with
their dicks already in the darling and
it's already there in the door which
server now if you have any specific
questions on which corresponds you will
file system then we can talk about it
then come see me we can talk about it
later now i will get Clark back the
stage
okay thanks for mesh all right so that's
it the only key thing left to tell you
about is that the next new file for the
feature could be yours this is our
Darwin slide if you're really interested
in the stuff we've talked about with you
bc vino tops and so forth check out
Darwin take a look take our code please
some of the new things some of the ideas
we've just sort of tossed around an NTFS
implementation because we haven't gotten
to it yet protoss the stuff we used to
ship with Apple two machines we don't
have a logical volume manager so venom
might be an interesting thing to port we
don't have a Linux file system support
yet so X 2 FS might be interesting thing
to port and you know force there's
always your fest and we haven't thought
of you some stuff we'd like to have you
take away with you choose your interface
carefully remember that there are some
subtle differences that happen because
of the volume format and there's some
subtle differences in the what the
interface is doing to not allow if
you're doing a new object orientation
you want to use cocoa if you need access
to the resource for community new carbon
etc be aware of those behavior
differences that Pat talks about between
back OS 10 and Mac OS 9 and also among
the different volume formats we support
if you do want to implement a new file
system where a file system stack be sure
it's necessary because you are as Dean
Reese mentioned in the i okayed session
going to be in the kernel and if there's
something that goes wrong you'll crash
the whole system so be sure you need to
phone infest is probably not the best
way to do modem access for example and
be aware of the unified buffer cache
because it has changed the way file
systems interact with cashing in the
system and finally make sure you use
Darwin as a resource and i'll mention
now even before the roadmap slide that
today at six thirty and holiday one
there'll be a birds of a feather session
for the folks that are interested in
Darwin and if you have questions about
Darwin you won't you'll want to come to
that Hall j16 30 tonight other sections
you might be interested in there is a
Mac os10 Colonel session tomorrow at
nine o'clock in the Civic Center and if
you're curious about universal page list
will be some talk about that there
there's also a Mac os10 application
packaging and document typing session
that may be important to go to if you
want to find out about how we're doing
like mapping launch bindings and I con
decisions and stuff like that that's
going to be tomorrow with two here in
the big hall now
queston bsd support is going to be in
Hall a to friday at three thirty the
crucial session if you're curious about
the bsp infrastructure inside of mac OS
10 and the feedback form for mac OS 10
overall i'll be there as well as all the
other core OS managers that'll be in
room j1 friday at two o'clock p.m. if
you have questions you want to get in
contact with us about you know closer
relationships or get on mailing list or
whatever give a shout to John Sigma at
cigna and apple com is the technology
manager for mac OS 10 in apple worldwide
developers i see we only have a couple
minutes left and so we're not going to
be able to do questions here on the
stage but my team will be in the back of
the hall over there if you want to come
by and ask us questions and we'll also
be at the birds i will also be at the
birds of a feather and i'll also be on
campus tomorrow from 7930 for the big
campus event so thanks a lot for your
time we appreciate your coming
[Applause]
you